# Intercal
 COSC310 Group project
Group Members:
- Adam Badry
- Oakley Pankratz
- Nic Kouwenhoven
- Jayden Jayawardhena
# Youtube Video
## https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pQj26VnKMXw
# Github
## https://github.com/Sk3tch7y/Intercal

# Requirement Document Updated:
## Project Description:
Our Group goal with this project was to help make a useful research tool for people looking into water levels in canadian lakes and rivers. By using evironment Canada's data, and creating a tool to visualize data, and track lake performance in real time and flag potential issues with lake levels.

## User Groups:
### Researchers:
Researchers can locate water levels and data visualizations that show trends in the water levels over a period of time. This can help with analysis of water flows for any region in Canada, and will lend itself to a researcher's tool set for statistical analysis and visualization

### Curious Individuals
This tool will allow anybody who is curious about understanding water levels in their area to view the trends on the app; This way they can make informed decisions regarding possible seasonal patterns, flooding, discharge, etc.

## Final list of requirements:

### User Requirements:
#### Regular User:
 - Search for lakes based on ID or station name
    -Done
 - View lake data, statistics and visualizations
    -Done
 - View lake predictions
    -Done
 - Add lakes to bookmark bar
    -Done
 - Create accounts
    -Done
 - Filter lakes based on station parameters
    -Done (You can filter based in name/locations)
#### Admin:
 - Flag lakes for alerts
    -Done
### System Requirements:
#### Functional Requirements:
 - Query the database for lakes with specific ID's or names
    -Done
 - Display current lake data within a dashboard
    -Done
 - Display lake levels in a data visualization
    -Done
 - Link lakes to a user's dashboard via bookmarks sidebar
    -Done
 - Allow admin to assign alerts to lakes out of acceptable values within a database
    -Done
 - Add users to databases according to their input
    -Done
 - Filter lakes based on their parameters
    -Done
 - The system must query water level data from government API
    -Done
#### Non-Functional Requirements:
 - Predictions must be processed on client-side
 - Data visualization client-side -Done
 - Maintain flagged lakes and monitoring posts -Done
 - Store users and bookmarked lakes on server -Done
 - Respond to queries in a reasonable amount of time -Done
### User Stories:
 - As a user, I want to get visualizations for lake data so that I can gain an understanding of water annual water flows in a given area
    Users have access to full data visualization
 - As a admin, I want to flag issues with lakes I come across.
    Admin can click the flag icon to mark them in the database
 - As a admin, I want the system to show lakes with potential issues
    System is capable of serving only lakes marked as problematic
 - As a user, I want to be able to sign into an account
    Users can Sign in
 - As a user, I want a to be able to filter lakes based on names, lakes, or water levels
    Users Can filter based on names, lakes and other data, just not water levels as we are rate limited
 - As a user, I want to be able to save certain lakes to my dashboard for convenient analysis
    users can bookmark lakes
 - As a user, I want to be able to manage my personal dashboard in order to edit or remove certain elements
    Users can easily remove bookmarks
 - As a user, I want to see a forecast for what the lake data will look like.
    Users can view lake forecasting and data visualization

# Status of Implementation:
## How many of your initial requirements that your team set out to deliver did you actually deliver (a checklist/table would help to summarize)?  Were you able to deliver everything or are there things missing?  Did your initial requirements sufficiently capture the details needed for the project?
## Checklist:
<table>
<tr>
<td>Alerting System:</td><td style="background-color: green; color: white;">Done</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Visualizations:</td><td style="background-color: green; color: white;">Done</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Two Roles:</td><td style="background-color: green; color: white;">Done</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Filtering:</td><td style="background-color: green; color: white;">Done</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Predictions:</td><td style="background-color: green; color: white;">Done</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Dashboards:</td><td style="background-color: green; color: white;">Done</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Login/Registration System:</td><td style="background-color: green; color: white;">Done</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Database:</td><td style="background-color: green; color: white;">Done</td>
</tr>
</table>

## How many tasks are left in the backlog?
We have no tasks left in the backlog
## What is the architecture of the system? 
For Our system we settled on RESTful Architecture, Using the REMN(React-Express-MySQL-NODE.js) tech stack
 
## What are the key components?  
Our Main Components are  the Front-End, Data Visualization, API/Database, And Government of Canada Querying

## What design patterns did you use in the implementation? 
As we did use React the design pattern we took most advantage of was the the Factory Pattern For our components, the Singleton Pattern for our popup menus and database connections, The Observer Pattern for our bookmark Bar updates(Watches changes between button clicks across objects using a custom hook). We did not have a need for any patterns out side of these

## This needs to be sufficiently detailed so that the reader will have an understanding of what was built and what components were used/created.  You will need to reflect on what you planned to build vs what you built.

   We Created nearly Everything from scratch, the only thing we did not build was The visualization library Chart.js. This is very nearly what we had planned to build, but we did hit a lot of limitations with using the government of Canada API as if you request the same thing more than once, it wont respond. This made us re-do a Lot of our functions, changing away from AJAX in our feed and search bar to hard functions. While it did make our site feel more clunky the original goals we had set out for our users are there. If we could go back we would probably only try to make a React Native app to better take advantage of visualization tools. We would also add cleaner styles for the visualization.

## What degree and level of re-use was the team able to achieve and why?
   The Team was able to Reuse a lot of our code, since we stuck so closely to the Design Principles Adam outlined in his document, we managed to avoid a lot of headache trying to destructure and refactor our code weekly. The team was able to stay efficient by writing clean, and maintainable code that others were able to build on. 

## Indicate any known bugs in the software.
   -There is a know bug with the flag system- The flag can be added more than once 
   -Flags can only be removed via the database
   -The API Rate limiting us is the cause of most other issues, as if anything happens too fast it cant keep up and returns an empty set, causing errors


## Explain how these bugs can be fixed.
   -Add unique Identifier to the database
   -Swap flag button on flagged posts so that you can remove it
   -Make our own API for live Data or store data in a database with periodic updates

# Reflections:
## 1. How did your project management work for the team?  What was the hardest thing, and what would you do the same/differently the next time you plan to complete a project like this?
Project management worked well. We split up our features into issues pretty well into sections to limit merge conflicts and avoid issues with wasted work.
The hardest thing was contending with the Government of Canada API. Due to the structure of the milestones we felt we were stuck using an API that did not fully suit our needs.

## 2. Do you feel that your initial requirements were sufficiently detailed for this project?  Which requirements did you miss or overlook?
We felt that we had a pretty decent set of initial requirements for the project. There were some features that seemed unnecessary to the style of app we were creating, but we managed to fit them into our project in a meaningful way.
One requirement that we could not achieve was the ability to search by a water level. This was due to the fact that the water level data was kept separate from the main station API, meaning we would have to do 2 API calls to grab water data, and this data was too much to fit locally on a machine.

## 3. What did you miss in your initial planning for the project (beyond just the requirements)?
We missed the fact that the API would rate limit you super fast. This led to a lot of headaches further down the line.
As well as this, we were unable to include units in our data due to the fact that the Government of Canada hydrometric data API does not standardize their numbers to any unit of measurement. It is instead based on the units of the devices used to measure levels.

## 4. Would you (as a team) deal with testing differently in the future?

Our unit testing was adequate for our implementation. A lot of time was spent testing visual components manually. Next time, we would use some sort of visual testing framework like Cypress

## 5. If you were to estimate the efforts required for this project again, what would you consider?  (Really I am asking the team to reflect on the difference between what you thought it would take to complete the project vs what it actually took to deliver it).

We estimated what it would take fairly well, though we were not expecting React to be as difficult to learn.

## 6. What did your team do that you feel is unique or something that the team is especially proud of (was there a big learning moment that the team had in terms of gaining knowledge of a new concept/process that was implemented).

Adam: I feel like the efforts the team went through to plan out our implementation really came in handy as we were cleanly able to avoid almost all merge conflicts and we had nearly zero days where we were waiting for other features to be completed so that we could work on the next features. I think that I did a great job directing the team so that we were on track for every new Scrum meeting!. My Team also did a amazing job trying to learn react and how REST API's work. We had completely turned around how our project was going once everyone was up to speed and it showed. Our Visualizations are helpful and cool, the way to search for monitoring posts works great, and everything is tied together well and tested Vigorously!  

Jayden:
Oakley:
Nic: A big learning moment for me was realizing what technical debt can do to a project when there are multiple working on implementing features. Tying some of our features together at the end took longer than I had anticipated, and led to a lot of troubleshooting across all members of our team.



# Step-by-Step guide

1. You should follow the [ServerSetup.md](../Code/ServerSetup.md) guide to setup the server side functionality

---

2. In the ```./Code/intercal/``` directory, run the following commands:

```
npm install
```

This will install everything from the directory's ```package-lock.json``` file

```
npm start
```

This starts the front-end on [localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000)

---

3. In the ```./Code/server/``` directory, run the following commands:

```
npm install
```

This will install everything from the directory's ```package-lock.json``` file

```
npm start
```

This will start the server on the localhost

The app should now be fully operable on [localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000)

# Reflections:
## 1. How did your project management work for the team?  What was the hardest thing, and what would you do the same/differently the next time you plan to complete a project like this?
Project management worked well. We split up our features into issues pretty well into sections to limit merge conflicts and avoid issues with wasted work.
The hardest thing was contending with the Government of Canada API. Due to the structure of the milestones we felt we were stuck using an API that did not fully suit our needs.

## 2. Do you feel that your initial requirements were sufficiently detailed for this project?  Which requirements did you miss or overlook?
We felt that we had a pretty decent set of initial requirements for the project. There were some features that seemed unnecessary to the style of app we were creating, but we managed to fit them into our project in a meaningful way.
One requirement that we could not achieve was the ability to search by a water level. This was due to the fact that the water level data was kept separate from the main station API, meaning we would have to do 2 API calls to grab water data, and this data was too much to fit locally on a machine.
## 3. What did you miss in your initial planning for the project (beyond just the requirements)?
We missed the fact that the API would rate limit you super fast. This led to a lot of headaches further down the line.
As well as this, we were unable to include units in our data due to the fact that the Government of Canada hydrometric data API does not standardize their numbers to any unit of measurement. It is instead based on the units of the devices used to measure levels.

## 4. Would you (as a team) deal with testing differently in the future?
Our unit testing was adequate for our implementation. A lot of time was spent testing visual components manually. Next time, we would use some sort of visual testing framework like Cypress

## 5. If you were to estimate the efforts required for this project again, what would you consider?  (Really I am asking the team to reflect on the difference between what you thought it would take to complete the project vs what it actually took to deliver it).
We estimated what it would take fairly well, though we were not expecting React to be as difficult to learn.

## 6. What did your team do that you feel is unique or something that the team is especially proud of (was there a big learning moment that the team had in terms of gaining knowledge of a new concept/process that was implemented).
Adam:

Jayden: 
I really learned alot about how to structure code so that it can be interpreted by someone other than myself. I had to make documentatoin for my code, as it was essential for the rest of the team to understand what my functions do, and for setting up the app environement essential for coding and testing. Before this project I did not understand the inportance of doing so, I think the first hand experience has taught me a lot. It was hard work, but its nice to see a finished project that I couldn'y have done on my own.

Oakley:
Nic: A big learning moment for me was realizing what technical debt can do to a project when there are multiple working on implementing features. Tying some of our features together at the end took longer than I had anticipated, and led to a lot of troubleshooting across all members of our team.

## If you have any requirements unimplemented, you will want to include an extra section showing those requirements have not been implemented.
   We Implemented everything that we had intended to
If you have a requirement that is partially working but feel that there's enough you don't want to call the whole requirement as incomplete, then break it up into two requirements, with one shown as tested and working, while the other is shown as not working.
How many tasks are left in the backlog?
What is the architecture of the system?  What are the key components?   What design patterns did you use in the implementation?  This needs to be sufficiently detailed so that the reader will have an understanding of what was built and what components were used/created.  You will need to reflect on what you planned to build vs what you built.
What degree and level of re-use was the team able to achieve and why?
Indicate any known bugs in the software.
Explain how these bugs can be fixed.

